# hello
# How did Tengrism survive through Islamization in pre-Kazakhstan?

**20230965 Alua Kaliazhdarova**

Tengri (or tänri in Old Turkic, tänir in Kazakh) from Turkic and Mongolic languages means "sky". It is the basis of Tengrism, an ancient belief in the sky god and in deities and spirits connected to it. This belief system was practiced in many Turkic and Mongolic, deeply influencing the nomad culture. Although Tengrism is considered long extinct, as the followers have all gradually converted to Islam or Buddhism or other religions, its influence persists through centuries of religious changes in Central Asia and its values and practices shape the modern-day culture of the region.

Due to the oral nature of the nomadic nations that practiced Tengrism, there are little to no written original sources of information about the religion. This essay will be relying on existing papers, personal interpretation, and personal cultural experience. It is also important to note that information on some topics may differ in various sources. In addition to that, this essay will primarily focus on culture of Kazakhstan and states preceding it, including parts of the Mongol Empire, Juchi's Ulus, and Chagatai's Ulus. Despite common ancestry, considering the differences of modern-day Turkic countries and Mongolia, some information may not be applicable to contemporary Mongol culture.

Archeological sources from the Orkhon valley and Siberia date Tengrism back to 6th-8th centuries. However, some believe that the sun-headed deity portrayed in Bronze/Iron age Tamgaly petroglyph site to be Tengri too. But this contradicts one of the main principles of Tengrism: Tengri is never personified. Most people do not consider Tengrism a religion for the lack of architecture and written records. But it makes a lot of sense considering the lifestyle of old Turkic tribes. Tengri is an omnipresent deity, the synonym of sky, watching people from above. (Ayupov, 2012) This is symbolic to a shanyraq, the roof crown of the yurt, connecting people with the sky. So, there was no need to build houses of worship, as anyone could pray anywhere: in their home, outside on a pasture, on the way to the pasture and their prayers would be heard. This was perfect for the nomadic lifestyle.

The main principle behind Tengrism was tied to harmony with nature and ancestral spirits. Living in harmony with nature was essential for nomads. Sustainable lifestyle and harmony with nature was not just a belief. Cyclical movement between seasonal pastures would allow the regeneration of the land, giving livestock feed. Tengri was the supreme god in the religion, but there were other gods and deities, most of which take the form of some natural phenomena. For example, Umai Ana (means "Mother Umai"), often paired with Tengri, was the goddess of earth and fertility and the protector of unborn children. Ot-ana (Mother of fire) is the goddess of fire, who represented the warmth of Tengri and Umai to the people. Ier-sub (Jer-su in Kazakh) was also part of the divine triad along with Umai and Tengri, in translation means earth and water. (Nauryzbau, 2023)

Tengrism is believed to be the "religion" of Genghis Khan and his successors. From the Mongol Empire, it is said that Tengrism did not deny other monothetic religions. Most of the "proofs" of the existence of Tengrism as a belief system come from the khans of the Mongol empire. Due to that, Tengrism is often called just shamanism, even is defined so in Wikipedia. Narrowing it down to just shamanism though is quite Eurocentric. A Kazakhstani philosopher, Nigmet Ayupov, who specializes in Tengrist philosophy, claims that it is much more complex than what it is often reduced to. (Ayupov, 2012) Yet it is true that shamans played a role in Tengrism, and that role was well documented in The Secret History of the Mongols. Shamans ("baqsy" in Kazakh) have played a role of healers, mediums, and court advisors. The importance of shamans was closely tied to the belief in ancestral (and other) spirits ("aruaq" in Kazakh).

Unlike in Islam and other Abrahamic religions, where souls are transferred to either hell or heaven, spirits in Tengrism can visit the world of the living, even stay in it, or take form of some natural phenomena. They could interfere with people's daily life by offering blessings and curses, in which case a shaman was summoned. In the Mongol empire, shamans often played the roles of fortunetellers at court and among soldiers. It is said that Mongols only went to battle after a shaman predicted a good outcome. But such rituals are likely just a political tool to morally support the soldiers before battle.

Tengrism was a popular belief system in the successors of the Mongol Empire until 1330s. By 1330s, Juchi's, Chagatai's, and Hulagu's Ulus all converted to Islam. During the rule of Uzbek khan from 1312, the Golden Horde became an Islamic khanate. (Hautala, 2018) According to Nehemia Levtzion, despite the prohibition of other religions and beliefs, the conversion was hardly a break past traditions, with pre-Islamic beliefs and traditions surviving. Some even doubt the full heartedness of conversion for that reason. Conversion might also have been a political tool to rally support from the Muslim population in the khanates. (Jackson, 2019)

The Kazakh Khanate was formed by Kerei and Janibek khans as an Islamic state in 1465 after gaining independence from the White horde (Eastern wing of the Golden Horde). It consisted of many Turkified Mongol and some Turkic tribes, such as qonyrats (khongirad in Mongolian) and kipchaks. Unlike other Islamic states, however, the Kazakh Khanate did not follow sharia, instead establishing their own set of laws that was instituted by Kasym Khan, called Bright Road of Kasym khan. According to Wikipedia, the laws were mostly based on the older laws of Chagataid Uluses and Kipchaks, and did not go against the Quran, but kept the tradition of nomads, tightly connected to Tengrism. Sufis, being important figures in Central Asian Islam, could also be part of such smooth conversion, helping integrate tradition with Islamic customs.

Islam has been a progressive religion on many accounts, introducing advances in science and technology and improved women's status compared to older Abrahamic religions. However, women of nomadic societies had more freedom even before Islam. Turkic women were known to be unveiled, active in the society and politics, and even warfare. The division of labor was not as prominent in nomadic societies compared to sedentary. (Dalkesen, 2007) Tribes neighboring Chinese and Islamic empires became more conservative with time due to frequent contact with foreigners. Traditional Islamic clothing would hinder movement, which would be impossible to wear considering nomadic lifestyle. Kazakhstan Central state museum confirms that ethnic jewelry like shashbau and sholpy, worn on braids, prove that covering hair was not enforced. Women were allowed to cover their hair only after the birth of their child or marriage. This unfortunately changed with Islamization.

Tengrism was not less progressive or more restricting than Islam in any way. Islam, however, was a big, centralized religion, with its own book, institutions, and missionaries, everything that Tengrism lacked. In addition to that, from the examples of convert khanates, we can see that the Islamization was not as radical as it may seem. Islam's goal was not to completely supplant existing beliefs and destroy local traditions, but rather to integrate with them, (Jackson, 2019) like in the Bright Road of Kassym Khan, where chingissid laws and sharia come together. Tengri and Allah were considered the names of the one true god, and most of the traditions and beliefs connected to Tengri have stayed. However, as goddesses were worshipped in Tengrism, which was not applicable to Islam, most female deities have been demonized. It is especially noticeable in Kazakh mythology, where most villains happen to be female. (Nauryzbai, 2023) It is considered that only after the extinction of the traditional nomadic lifestyle in Central Asia during the Soviet Union, true Tengrism has disappeared with it.

But Tengrist traditions still exist in Kazakhstan today, often blended with Islam. I would especially outline the strong belief in ancestral spirits, distinct from traditional Islam. Each Friday and on the day of Arafah, spirits come to visit the homes of their relatives, and Kazakh people cook a dish called Jeti shelpek, meaning seven flatbreads, and read a prayer from Quran to the spirits of their ancestors and everyone who dined in their home. It is believed that the smell of the oil and bread attracts the spirits to the house. Shamanistic ritual called alastau is performed to clear the house from evil spirits, diseases, and the evil eye. Dried peganum (adyraspan in kazakh) is burned and the whole house and each person should be covered in its smoke, calling out a Kazakh (non-Muslim) prayer. Unlike in other Islamic countries, Kazakhs practiced exogamy, strictly forbidding the marriage within the same clan, sometimes punishable by death. Nowadays, Kazakh people learn their 7 ancestors to avoid marriage within 7th generation. Even in burial Tengrist traditions retained (Nauryzbai, 2024), like joqtau for example, a loud lamentation expressed by the female relatives of the dead, so the spirit could hear ther cries. If the death is not mourned, the spirit might abandon its descendants, or even turn vengeful. Those rituals are not considered as "religious" anymore, but rather as ethnic traditions. Tengri remains a popular figure in Kazakh popular culture, in names of news services (TengriNews), festivals (The Spirit of Tengri), and even in the names of geographical locations (Khan Tengri peak). Tengrist influences stay in music and cinema. (Monastireva-Ansdell, 2024)

To this day, some people claim themselves to be Tengrist in modern Kazakhstan, and other Turkic countries (Laruelle, 2007), despite sedentary lifestyle being unsuitable for Tengrism. Moreover, Tengrism is not the ethnic religion of Kazakhs as they claim it to be, because Islam has always been the religion of Kazakhs since the nation came together in 1465. In other words, neo Tengrism is mostly just a response to the rapid and somewhat radical Islamization in Kazakhstan. In today's world many Islamists oppose the traditional customs of Kazakhs that stayed from Tengrism, like the ones mentioned above. But by rejecting religious attire and practices, modern Tengrists often mirror the Islamists, whose rigid values they oppose. The "religion vs tradition" debate that keeps resurfacing on social media further divides people of the same nation. Islam and Tengrism have coexisted for centuries, so there is no need to deny either.

Tengrism might not be practiced as an official religion today, yet it is rooted so deeply in Kazakh identity, history, spirituality, and tradition. Merging and adapting through centuries, it creates a unique version of Kazakh Islam, seen in funerals, architecture, and daily life. Kazakh spirituality is not authentically Muslim or Tengrist, but a legacy of both. Tengrism lives on not through books or temples, but through generations of oral tradition, seemingly fragile, but surprisingly persistent and hard to erase.

---

*"Spirit of Ancestors" by Beisembai Akzel.*

## References

- Laruelle, M. (2007). Religious revival, nationalism and the 'invention of tradition': political Tengrism in Central Asia and Tatarstan. *Central Asian Survey*, 26(2), 203–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/02634930701517433

- Ayupov, N. (2012). Tengrism as an open mindset. KazNPU named after Abai. https://tengrifund.ru/wp-content/library-tengrifund/Monografiya_Ayupova.pdf

- Jackson, P. (2019). Reflections on the Islamization of Mongol Khans in comparative perspective. *Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient*, 62(2–3), 356–387. https://doi.org/10.1163/15685209-12341482

- Nauryzbai, Z. (2024) BIRTH, MARRIAGE, AND DEATH - Qalam. *Qalam*. https://qalam.global/en/articles/birth-marriage-and-death-en-3

- Hautala, R. (2018). The Islamization of the Jochid and Hulaguid Uluses in Comparison: Points of View from Muslim and Christian Sources. *Golden Horde Review*, 6(4), 676–695. https://doi.org/10.22378/2313-6197.2018-6-4.676-695

- Dalkesen, N. (2007). GENDER ROLES AND WOMEN'S STATUS IN CENTRAL ASIA AND ANATOLIA BETWEEN THE THIRTEENTH AND SIXTEENTH CENTURIES. METU. https://etd.lib.metu.edu.tr/upload/12608663/index.pdf (accessed on 21/02/2025)

- Monastireva-Ansdell, E. (2024). Globalising the steppe: environment and identity in Ermek Tursunov's Tengrist parables. *Studies in Russian and Soviet Cinema*, 18(1), 101–120. https://doi.org/10.1080/17503132.2023.2298050

- Nauryzbai, Z. (2023) WOMEN IN KAZAKH MYTHOLOGY - Qalam. *Qalam*. https://qalam.global/en/articles/women-in-kazakh-mythology-en-3. https://qalam.global/en/articles/women-in-kazakh-mythology-en-2
